Better describe the use of Preferred Address (#3354)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

using a NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame.

As discussed in {{migration-linkability}}, each connection ID MUST be used on
packets sent from only one local address, and MUST NOT be used across multiple
paths that are opened intentionally.  An endpoint SHOULD retire connection IDs

> as they become unusable.

Reviewer: This new text is less accurate.  It is potentially always possible to reuse connection IDs, but what matters is whether the endpoint forsees use of the connection ID.  The original text is probably not as good as it could be, but that seems unrelated to the stated goal of the PR.

As this is a restatement of the original text in another section, I would prefer to keep this terse.  In fact, I would not use normative language and instead say:

> As discussed in {{blah}}, endpoints limit the use of a connection ID to a single network path where possible.  Endpoints SHOULD retire connection IDs when no longer actively using the network path on which the connection ID was used.

Reviewer 2: I'd tend to agree here.

I think the normative text in question is: 
> ##### Section 9.5 Privacy Implications of Connection Migration
> ...
> An endpoint MUST use a new connection ID if it initiates connection migration as
described in {{initiating-migration}} or probes a new network path as described
in {{probing}}.  An endpoint MUST use a new connection ID in response to a
change in the address of a peer if the packet with the new peer address uses an
active connection ID that has not been previously used by the peer.

This seems to me like: 
> each connection ID MUST be used on packets sent from only one local address

still has value as normative text (although it would likely be better all in one place).

Not sure the new text improves on what's there now, does:
> , and MUST NOT be used across multiple paths that are opened intentionally.

add anything to clarity of this point?

Reviewer 2: Ah, I see later some of this is covered :)

At any time, endpoints MAY change the Destination Connection ID they send to a
value that has not been used on another path.

An endpoint MUST use a new connection ID when it initiates connection migration
as described in {{initiating-migration}} or {{preferred-address}}, or when it

> probes a new network path as described in {{probing}}, and MUST NOT reuse

Reviewer: The run-on sentence here could be two sentences.

```suggestion
probes a new network path as described in {{probing}}. Endpoints MUST NOT reuse
```

...but I'm not seeing what the new content here does.  It appears to just be a restatement of the previous clause.

Author: The problem with the existing text is that while it says that a new connection ID MUST be used when "initiating" a migration, or probing, it does not forbid reuse of a CID (that has previously used on a different path) once the path is being validated.

That's is why I added the "MUST NOT" without splitting the sentence.

Reviewer: The "MUST NOT" stands on its own in that case:

> An endpoint MUST NOT use a connection ID on a given network path if it has used the same connection ID to send packets on another network path.

The intended meaning of "new" in this text is to imply "previously unused", which might be more clearly stated as:

> An endpoint MUST use a connection ID that it has not previously used when it initiates connection migration ({{initiating-migration}}), including using a preferred address ({{preferred-address}}).  Similarly, an endpoint MUST use an unused connection when probing a new network path ({{probing}}).   An endpoint MUST use a previously-unused connection ID in response to a change in the address of a peer if the packet with the new peer address uses an active connection ID that has not been previously used by the peer.  An endpoint MUST NOT [...as above].

This covers all the existing reasons to use a previously unused connection ID.  You could restate as a list instead, I guess:

> An endpoint MUST use a new connection ID when it:
> * migrates to a new network path ({{initiating-migration}}), including migrating to a server's preferred address ({{preferred-address}});
> * probes a new network ({{probing}}); or,
> * sends a packet on a new network path as a result of responding to the migration of a peer, where the peer uses a connection ID that has not been used on another path.
>In all cases, an endpoint MUST NOT use a connection ID on a given network path if it has used the same connection ID to send packets on another network path.

Reviewer 3: We do have this text in [5.1.2](https://quicwg.org/base-drafts/draft-ietf-quic-transport.html#name-consuming-and-retiring-conn):
> As discussed in Section 9.5, each connection ID MUST be used on packets sent from only one local address. An endpoint that migrates away from a local address SHOULD retire all connection IDs used on that address once it no longer plans to use that address.

Is the missing piece that it should also be used for only one remote address, but this is the only scenario in which the server changes address?

Author: Yes. IIUC, the requirements are:
* A client MUST NOT reuse a CID across multiple paths (being identified by the 5 tuple).
* A server MUST NOT reuse a CID across multiple path, with the exception being that it MAY use a CID that has been used on one path on another path, if that new path is opened by a packet sent by a client using DCID for the old path.

We can combine these statements into one, and say that: An endpoint MUST NOT reuse a CID across multiple paths, with the exception being that it MAY use a CID that has been used on one path on another path, if that new path is opened by a packet sent by a client using DCID for the old path.

I think that is the most precise definition I can think of. If the above sounds fine, I can work on it.

Reviewer 2: Writing down the results of a discussion in ZRH about stating this in terms of endpoints (not client/server) and addresses (not paths):
- An endpoint MUST NOT reuse a CID when sending from more than one local address
- An endpoint MUST NOT reuse a CID when sending to more than one destination address

With the following exceptions/additions:
- An endpoint SHOULD NOT respond to a newly seen incoming CID with an outgoing CID that it has used before (should since it may not have a new one to use)
- An endpoint MAY skip switching if it has strong reason to believe that the remote endpoint didn't try to change (i.e. if CID didn't change and only port changed, it's likely NAT rebinding), although this exception is only necessary if it doesn't have a new one to use

(Modulo some wording tweaks)

I *think* this is the current state of the text, just rearranging to collapse the separate requirements into one cluster that's hopefully easy to understand. Will incorporate this into the SPA PR if that seems reasonable to you.

Reviewer 4: @erickinnear I think "MUST NOT" should be "MUST NOT deliberately" because NAT rebinding.

Servers MAY communicate a preferred address of each address family (IPv4 and
IPv6) to allow clients to pick the one most suited to their network attachment.

Once the handshake is confirmed, the client SHOULD select one of the two
server's preferred addresses and initiate path validation (see
{{migrate-validate}}) of that address using an active unused connection ID.

If path validation succeeds, the client SHOULD immediately begin sending all
future packets to the new server and discontinue use of the old server address.
If path validation fails, the client MUST continue sending all future packets to
the server's original IP address.

> When the client finishes migrating to the preferred address, it retires the

Reviewer 2: This is not currently required anywhere that I can find, do you want to make this a "SHOULD retire"?

Author: That's a keen observation. I had assume that we'd state that:
* a connection ID that was used on one path MUST NOT be used on a path created by migration
* a connection ID that becomes unusable SHOULD be retired

But surprisingly, we did not. As these requirements are common to ordinary connection migration and migration by preferred address, I've changed the sections that are shared by the two.

PTAL at commits 8201bd6 and dc1c5f7.

connection ID that was used for the original path ({{retiring-cids}}).
Similarly, a client that continues using the original server address SHOULD
retire the connection ID provided by the preferred_address transport parameter.

> Retirement of either of these connection IDs notifies the server the server

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Retirement of either of these connection IDs notifies the server of the
```

Servers MAY communicate a preferred address of each address family (IPv4 and
IPv6) to allow clients to pick the one most suited to their network attachment.

Once the handshake is confirmed (see Section 4.1.2 of {{QUIC-TLS}}), the client
SHOULD select one of the two server's preferred addresses and initiate path
validation (see {{migrate-validate}}) of that address using an active unused
connection ID.

If path validation succeeds, the client SHOULD immediately begin sending all
future packets to the new server and discontinue use of the old server address,
and retire the connection ID that was used for the original path
({{retiring-cids}}).  If path validation fails, or if the client decides not to
migrate to the preferred address, it MUST continue sending all future packets to
the server's original IP address, and retire the connection ID provided by the
preferred_address transport parameter.  Retirement of either of these connection

> IDs notifies the server of the address the client has chosen.

Reviewer: Let me try to be clearer about my objection to this last sentence.

This implies a semantic to the retirement of connection IDs that is not already defined.  It says that in addition to releasing the resource, the server can say definitively that those other network paths won't be used.  But this is misleading because retiring CID 1 does not prevent CID 4 from being used on that path.  Nothing says that the connection IDs sent in NEW_CONNECTION_ID have to be used on one or other path.  Better to keep the requirement where it is: don't migrate back if you use a preferred address.  

Yes, that means that servers can't be sure of behaviour of clients here, but they can use the destination address to confirm acceptance of the preferred address or not.  That should suffice.

Author: Maybe you want to state that in the issue (i.e. #3353), as we've been discussing there about having this requirement?

Servers MAY communicate a preferred address of each address family (IPv4 and
IPv6) to allow clients to pick the one most suited to their network attachment.

> Once the handshake is confirmed, the client SHOULD select one of the two

Reviewer: 👍 Do we need a citation here too?

Author: Done in 31584f.

server's preferred addresses and initiate path validation (see
{{migrate-validate}}) of that address using an active unused connection ID.

If path validation succeeds, the client SHOULD immediately begin sending all
future packets to the new server and discontinue use of the old server address.
If path validation fails, the client MUST continue sending all future packets to
the server's original IP address.

When the client finishes migrating to the preferred address, it retires the
connection ID that was used for the original path ({{retiring-cids}}).
Similarly, a client that continues using the original server address SHOULD
retire the connection ID provided by the preferred_address transport parameter.
Retirement of either of these connection IDs notifies the server of the

> address the client has chosen.

Reviewer: This creates a much stronger inference than I think we ever formally documented, though it is a reasonable one for sure.  If your intent is that the server never see data on the old path, then say that instead:

> Once a client has migrated successfully to a network path that uses a server preferred address, it MUST NOT migrate to a path using the address that was used during connection establishment.

Otherwise, the inference you are giving the server to make here is without any support.  Once you say this, you can drop this text.

Author: Yeah though not a "MUST NOT", that is already stated in the previous paragraph. That said, I think it would be better to merge the two paragraphs, as having two paragraphs describing what a client should do went migration succeeds (or fails) is confusing.

PTAL at commit f268ac4.

  transport parameter is only sent by a server. Servers MAY choose to only send
  a preferred address of one address family by sending an all-zero address and
  port (0.0.0.0:0 or ::.0) for the other family. IP addresses are encoded in
  network byte order. The Connection ID field and the Stateless Reset Token
  field contain the alternative connection ID that is assigned the sequence

>   number of one ({{issue-cid}}). Having them bundled with the  preferred address

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  number of one ({{issue-cid}}). Having them bundled with the preferred address
```

>   ensures that there would be at least one unused active connection ID when the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  ensures that there will be at least one unused active connection ID when the
```

  transport parameter is only sent by a server. Servers MAY choose to only send
  a preferred address of one address family by sending an all-zero address and
  port (0.0.0.0:0 or ::.0) for the other family. IP addresses are encoded in
  network byte order.

>   The Connection ID field and the Stateless Reset Token field contain an

Reviewer: This might fix the formatting issue.

```suggestion
: The Connection ID field and the Stateless Reset Token field contain an
```

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. Done in 7f34774.

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. Done in 7f34ff4.

  transport parameter is only sent by a server. Servers MAY choose to only send
  a preferred address of one address family by sending an all-zero address and
  port (0.0.0.0:0 or ::.0) for the other family. IP addresses are encoded in

>   network byte order. The Connection ID field and the Stateless Reset Token

Reviewer: New paragraph here please.
```suggestion
  network byte order.
  
  The Connection ID field and the Stateless Reset Token
```

Author: Done in 23bddd3e, however I do not see xml2rfc splitting the paragraph. Maybe because it's part of a list?

>   field contain the alternative connection ID that is assigned the sequence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  field contain an alternative connection ID that has a sequence
```

>   number of one ({{issue-cid}}). Having them bundled with the preferred address

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  number of 1 ({{issue-cid}}). Having these values bundled with the preferred address
```

  ensures that there will be at least one unused active connection ID when the
  client initiates migration to the preferred address. The CID Length field

>   contains the length of the Connection ID field.

Reviewer: I'd drop the last sentence.
